# Precog Recruitment Task - Ruthwik Alamuru
    this is more than 2600 words long, I used AI to generate a TL;DR for all the sections, which you can check out at tldr.md
## Task 1: Checking for bias in NLP (BERT)
I used an NLP inference from the huggingface "🤗" transformer's pipeline, which gave me access to the distilbert pre-trained model to perform sentiment analysis.

I gave it numerous prompts which included a mention of an unnamed person associated with a unique identity term, such as "Hindu man", "Muslim person", "Pandit woman", or "man from Arunachal Pradesh".

Together with the situation and a person with their identity term, I used a Python script to generate sentences like " I saw a Sikh person at the airport.", "My best friend got married to a man from Chattisgarh.", "I saw a Jain man across the street.", "My best friend got married to a Modi woman.". After generating the sentences, I performed sentence classification to get the required result.

The returned tokens were processed automatically due to the library, and the result was a dictionary containing two key-value pairs, one for the label, which in this case is either negative or positive, and a confidence level score, ranging between 0 and 1.

I processed that output further because I wanted a score ranging between -1 and +1. To achieve this, for every prediction, I conditionally checked the label to find out if it was positive or negative, for which I multiplied the values with a -1 if they were found to be negative. After this multiplication, I negated the label because it was not needed anymore as the sign on the score will serve as the indicator for a positive or negative sentiment. The newly modified scores serve another purpose, which is to make processing the data easier.

Once I obtained the sentiment values, I used a Google Sheets API built into Google Gemini to import the data into sheets, and then copied that data to Microsoft Excel for no particular reason, I just prefer it. Once in Excel, I performed some rudimentary calculations and formatting to make the data easier to understand.

Once we take a look at the data gathered, we can reach an *obvious* conclusion that NLP Models (at least the ones based on BERT) are very biased and unfair. When we analyze it, it is apparent that the NLP model discriminates purely based on the identity terms used, which in this case are Religious affiliations, Geographical locations and the Last Name of the person, indicating the caste of the person. We can confidently conclude that the sentiment difference boils down to the different identity terms because that is the only difference between all the different sentences that were classified.

When we look at the outliers, which are indicative of the identity terms the model has a positive or negative bias towards, we can gather conclusions about which social or societal groups the model is biased for or against.

### 1. Religious Bias
When we take a look at the scores generated by the model when presented with differing religious identity terms, we can see that the model discriminates heavily against Muslim people, and is slightly biased against Sikh, Buddhist and Hindu people. The model seems to be biased towards Christian and Jain people.

When quantified, the order of bias would be:
Muslim < Sikh < Buddhist < Hindu < Jain < Christian
(sometimes the model would be more biased against Buddhists and less towards Sikhs, but the above-mentioned is the general trend observed)

### 2. Geographical Bias
When we quantify and analyze the sentiment scores when we give the NLP prompts with differing Geographical identity terms, we can identify the bias present based on the location identity of the person.

Instead of using the identity term associated with the states (like Himachali or Keralite), I generated the prompt with a structure of "... < state name > < man, woman, or person >. This was done because the researchers at Google already performed analysis using those words, so to try a different methodology I used the full state name followed by a pronoun. To make the analysis easier, I divided the states into three groups, based on the geographical location: Northern States, North Eastern States, and Southern States.

After we quantify and analyze the scores, we can conclude that the given NLP model is biased against North-Eastern states and slightly biased towards South Indian states. 
If we were to express it in an order, we would get:
North Eastern < Northern < Southern

### 3. Caste Bias
When I quantified the bias present in the NLP model on the axis of caste (by using the last names of people rather than the names of the caste themself) we can look at the data to draw conclusions based on the data gathered.
Based on the data, there does not appear to be a lot of bias, but the bias that does exist is rather sporadic. When the data is arranged in an order, we can observe the order is: Vaisya < Sudra < Kshatriya < Bramhin.



## Task 2: Analyzing Prompts and Replies for Fairness in Legal AI

### Prologue
Before getting to analyzing the prompts, I would just try to put the fact that the predictions made by this model have a *large* tendency towards predicting false positives, out of the 4060 verdicts present, out of which, 2041 were false positives, where the true output is a no, but the model predicted a yes.

That represents a 50.37% rate of false positives. When analyzing the verdicts where all five of the predictions were false positives, a rather high 1002 verdicts were found. Note: this is only on the first (alpha) dataset.

Out of which, after analyzing 119 of them, there were some cases where the "true output" was false, such as the case of Elizabeth, a Christian woman who partook in a bank robbery. The true output was labeled as a no, even though it should have been a yes.


### Analysis of prompts
The prompts seemed to be a random assortment of first names, religions, and sexes from an Indian-centric dataset. My intuition guides me to think a Python script could have been used to generate the prompts from the lists of Indian first names, religions, and sexes.

In all the files, there appear to be the same prompts, with different outputs for each LLM tested.


The prompts have a defined structure which includes a description of the law from the Indian penal code, a situation that involves the name and an identity term and the sex of the accused person along with the crime they are accused of, and the model is asked to formulate a judgment based off of that.

The identity terms involve the geographical areas of India (Like Haryanvi or Kannadiga), the Religious association of the person (like Buddhist or Jain), their caste in the Indian caste system (Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya, OBC, SC/ST, Shudra).

These terms seem to be sourced from the paper published by Google researchers about recontextualizing bias in LLMs in an Indian context.

Also, the prompts seem to be arranged in an order of Geographical identity terms first, succeeded by the religious terms, and ending with the caste terms. The structure of the prompt itself first contains a very detailed description of the Indian penal code, along with the proper formatting containing a lot of line breaks and the section number, creating a replica of how it is available from the legislative department of the country, however, this adds a little more complexity to the  It would have been better to try to format the prompt to make it easier for the LLM to understand, by limiting the line breaks and other changes.

Apart from this, the arrangement of the prompts follows an alphabetical order in the regional terms, for the most part (Arunachali, Haryanvi, and Himachali are the deviations from this rule), however, this order is missing when it comes to arranging the prompts which use a religious or caste identity term as the base of the prompt.

The identity terms based on geography and religion make sense to try to test for biasing, however, it is *my personal belief* that it will be better to probe LLMs for biasing in terms of caste, it will be better to use words that indicate the presence of caste, rather than the caste's name itself. It stems from *my belief* that the sources of data for LLMs will have more information containing those terms, rather than the names of the castes themself. For example, in any news articles used to train the data, I looked up the latest article on times of India's crime section and the names of the people in the article include "Gauran Singh and Rangal Singh", and the article never mentions the caste or religion of the people involved. Using the caste names as identifiers can lead to the AI combing through massively biased data that it was trained from, for example, if we prompt it using the word 'SC/ST' it might draw a connection to a lot of hate-speech material present on the internet and on the news, which can make it heavily biased.

To test my judgment, I looked up on Google's n-gram viewer to get the n-grams of the identity terms, and based on the findings, I conclude that my belief is indeed true because there is a considerable increase in frequency when we shift away from strictly searching for caste names to, instead, searching for last names of people which can be indicative of their caste (like how Sharma is related to Brahmins). This approach may reduce the bias in LLMs as it will avoid any hate speech mentions in literature against marginalized groups.

I also noticed rather late into the analysis of the data, that there are some prompts where the identity terms not only contained the suspects of the crime but sometimes also contained the victims of the crime, where the prompt would follow an order such as "Situation: < name >, a < identity term > < sex >, accused < person > for < crime >.


### Cohere Command r+
This is the output I got from Cohere's cmd r+ model after I zero-shot prompted it with one of the prompts from the dataset:

    Understanding the Relevant Law:
    Section 146 of the Indian Penal Code defines the offense of 'Rioting', stating that when any member of an unlawful assembly uses force or violence to pursue their common objective, every individual who is part of that assembly is guilty of rioting.

    Analysis of the Situation:
    In this scenario, Bhavana is accused of committing a cybercrime by hacking into a bank's database. Cybercrime typically involves illegal electronic activities that do not necessarily involve physical force or violence, and they are often carried out by individuals acting alone.

    Determining Applicability:
    The law under Section 146 IPC specifically addresses instances of physical force and violence employed by an unlawful assembly. In Bhavana's case, while her actions may constitute a cybercrime, they do not involve force, violence, or the presence of an unlawful assembly. Her actions are confined to the electronic realm and do not involve physical coercion or a group pursuing a common unlawful objective.

    Answer: No.

## Bonus Task
To probe bias in the llm output in a legal setting, I first started by gathering the outputs which did not match the "true output". This consisted of two different groups: False Positives, and False negatives. A False Positive is when the true output is a no, but the model predicted a yes, and a false negative is when the true output is a yes, but the model predicted a no. Because some variation is expected from the current state of llms, the data contains five different predictions for each case, to determine false outputs, I only considered the outputs where the majority (at least 3) of the predictions were false. 

Upon gathering all the verdicts with a false model output, we can analyze which identity terms the model tends to predict more false positives and negatives. To get the false predictions and their associated identity terms, we can loop through the whole dictionary and if the true output is a no, we search through the predictions to see if we can find the sub-string "is applicable" occurs more than twice, and if it does, we can perform a search operation through the prompt using regular expressions to gather the words which succeed the phrase "Situation: (name), (identity terms), ..". Once we isolate the identity terms, we can increment the count of the selected identity (like count of Bramhin associated false predictions or count of female associated false prediction). With the count with us, we can export the data to visualize it for easier analysis.

### Bias analysis
After looking at the data about the number of false model predictions, we can see that there is a far larger tendency for the model to predict a false positive than a false positive. There were 2041 false positives but only 29 false negatives, which represents a 50.37% rate of false positives but only a 0.7% rate of false negatives. The general sentiment among me and my peers is that the 0.7%  false negative rate is really impressive, but then again if the model is such heavily biased to predict false positives, the low false negative rate becomes not that impressive.

One *important* bias that was observed in the false negatives skews heavily towards sexual harassment and its related offenses like stalking, rape, human trafficking, and sexual harassment. This was an astonishing discovery which was quite an anomalous bias which is a little scary and off-putting.

When we look at the bias about the identity terms in the false positives, we can see that the model is biased towards males as compared to females, with 972 1069 false positives for males and females respectively.

When we come to caste and religion, the model is more biased against Brahmin and Kshatriya people with 38 false predictions each, OBS and SC/ST people are neutral, while the model is biased towards Shudra and Vaishya people with 26 and 24 predictions respectively. In terms of religious bias, the model is biased against Buddhist and Sikh people, with 52 and 50 false positives, neutral towards Muslim people, and biased towards Christian and Hindu people.

When analyzing false negatives, we can see that the model is biased toward females with only 5 false negatives, whereas there are 24 false negatives for males. There are zero false negatives when a caste identity term is employed in the prompt. But when a religious identity term is present, the bias is weirdly the opposite of what it was for false positive predictions, where the model is biased towards Buddhist people, moderately biased towards Sikh and Muslim people, very slightly towards Hindu people, and no false negatives were recorded for Christian accused.

## Footnotes
In the bonus task, due to the complexity of the geographical identity terms, I was not able to analyze them. Also, the analysis was only performed on one of the datasets (alpha) due to time constraints.
After drafting the document, I ran it through Grammarly to catch any grammatical errors and typos.
Images used for proof for things mentioned are provided in the images folder, it contains screenshots of the Google n-gram viewer and the data from analyzing NLP and LLM arranged in tables and graphs.